Sample Essay (800 words)
For the assignment question and analysis, see Sample essay 1
Education means considerably more than just teaching a student to read, write, and
manipulate numbers. Computers, the Internet, and advanced electronic devices are 
becoming essential in everyday life and have changed the way information is gathered. 
How this new technology is utilized in the curriculum and managed by teachers will have an 
important role to play in widening the resource and knowledge base for all students. 
Technology affects the way teachers teach and students learn. To make the best use of
information technology (IT), schools need a workable plan to fully integrate it into all 
aspects of the curriculum so students are taught how, why, and when to use technology to 
further enhance their learning.
If a school does not have a clear plan of how and why it wishes to implement IT, then it 
runs the risk of wasting money. In schools today, nearly all classrooms have access to a 
computer. However, many schools mistake this as incorporating information technology 
into the curriculum. School staff need to research what IT is available and what would best 
serve the school's purpose, not simply purchase the latest equipment. There should be a 
policy stating how IT is going to assist pupils' development and what teachers want pupils 
to achieve (Reksten, 2000). Staff members need to be clear about what they want IT to do 
for them before they can start incorporating it into their lessons.
The only way information technology is going to be useful to schools is if all staff members 
are well-informed and fully supported. It is the principal's responsibility, and should be part 
of the school's plan, to ensure that all staff are consulted about the changes, and that the 
change is carefully organised. Some teachers may be resistant, especially if they have not 
had much experience with computers, so training teachers is essential in implementing IT 
into the school curriculum. Staff members must feel involved in the process of acquiring 
technology, and in learning how to operate it, in order for them to increase their confidence 
in using IT as a curriculum tool. Teachers are only going to be able to incorporate IT into 
their lessons if they are competent users themselves (Reksten, 2000).
In addition, teachers need to be aware that IT within the classroom is extremely flexible, but 
that they need to plan what purpose IT serves in each lesson. The skills a child learns are the
Comment [de1]: Structure: Introductions
The essay begins with a general lead into the broad 
topic by indicating the inadequacy of traditional 
teaching alone. It sets up a problem that the essay 
will solve. See essay introduction.
Comment [de2]: Format: Spacing
Essays are usually double-spaced or 1.5-line spaced.
See formatting and layout.
Comment [de3]: Structure: Introductions
The topic is narrowed by affirming the significance 
of IT for teachers and students.
Comment [de4]: Structure: Introductions
The final sentence is the thesis statement. Notice 
how the beginning of the sentence is constructed to 
answer the essay question. It uses keywords from 
the question: “best use”, “information technology”, 
and “schools”. See essay thesis statement.
Comment [de5]: Format: Abbreviations
“Information technology” is followed by its 
abbreviated form in brackets: “(IT)”.
Now that it has been defined, the abbreviation can 
be used elsewhere in the essay.
Comment [de6]: Structure: Body paragraphs
The first sentence of this paragraph is the topic 
sentence. It signals that the paragraph is about how 
schools need a clear plan for implementing IT. This 
point follows up on the first point made in the thesis 
statement: schools need a workable plan. See essay
body paragraphs.
Comment [de7]: Structure: Body paragraphs
This statement moves into specifics; it details 
particular actions that a school can do to develop an 
IT plan. See essay body paragraphs.
Comment [de8]: Referencing: In-text
citation
This in-text citation indicates that the idea 
presented in this sentence is taken from an outside 
source. The in-text citation gives the surname of the 
author (Reksten) and the year the source was 
published (2000). This citation uses APA style. See 
APA in-text citation.
Comment [de9]: Structure: Body paragraphs
The final sentence of the paragraph summarises and 
restates the idea introduced at the start of the 
paragraph.
Comment [de10]: Referencing:
Paraphrasing
The idea in this sentence is taken from an outside 
source, as indicated by the in-text citation. The 
exact wording of the source has not been used, so 
this is a paraphrase. See paraphrasing and
summarising.
important part of any lesson, and it is the same with technology. IT needs to be used and 
understood in all subjects in the same way as the ability to read is necessary for all subjects, 
and “must be used across the curriculum, in the same way that a pen and pencil are used in
most subject areas” (Ager, 2000, p. 15). The best way to plan the use of IT in the classroom 
is to approach it as simply a learning tool that is more advanced (and more exciting) than 
the traditional pen and paper.
Comment [de11]: Referencing: Quotation
The quotation marks indicate that this is taken 
word-for-word from an outside source. Rather than 
standing alone, the quotation is integrated into the 
sentence.
The sentence begins with the student's own words, 
and then flows directly into the quotation. See 
integrating quotations with your writing.
It is vitally important for students to be taught the strategies for using IT. Children also need to be 
fully informed about the capabilities of IT before being asked to use it. Pupils should be aware that 
the contexts in which they use IT will change, and they need to know what the appropriate use of 
IT is and what is not. Whilst it is important that children learn to use IT effectively, teachers must 
emphasise that IT is not always suitable. According to Apter (1968),
the danger is that the “computer dehumanizes people and inevitably leads them to act 
like machines themselves” (p. 58). Teachers must make sure they plan to use variety in 
their lessons. Too much IT instruction may be just as harmful to a child as not enough.
The usefulness of IT in the classroom, as with any learning tool, depends on the innovation
and imagination of the teacher. It is imperative, though, that the implementation of IT into 
a school is carefully planned. The current information explosion makes it essential that IT be 
used extensively within the classroom so children know how to use IT appropriately and 
effectively. Teachers must, therefore, be fully informed about what kinds of IT are available 
and whether or not they are appropriate for classroom use. School boards and teachers 
must therefore ensure that all staff have a clear plan about what they want their students 
to achieve through IT. The appropriate incorporation of IT into the classroom will broaden 
the minds and skills of students, allowing them to be better prepared for further 
technological advances.
References
Ager, R. (2000). The art of information and communications technology for teachers. David 
Fulton.
Apter, A. J. (1968). The new technology of education. Macmillan.
Reksten, L. E. (2000). Using technology to increase student learning. Corwin Press.
Comment [de12]: Referencing: In-text
citation
This in-text citation also indicates a page number. Intext citations for quotations should always have a 
page number, if one is available. See page numbers
in APA in-text citations.
Comment [de13]: Structure: Body
paragraphs
This topic sentence deals with the final points made 
in the thesis statement. It focuses on teaching 
students how, why, and when to use technology.
Comment [de14]: Referencing: Author name
When citing a source, the author's name can also 
appear outside the brackets as part of the sentence. 
The year and page number still remain within 
brackets. See APA in-text citation.
Comment [de15]: Structure: Conclusion
The conclusion reaffirms the points made in each 
paragraph. Together, these points support the 
thesis statement (the overall argument). See essay
conclusion.
Comment [de16]: Format: Heading
Short essays do not need headings or sub-headings. 
The exception is the reference list: this section 
should be identified with a heading. See APA
reference list.
Comment [de17]: Referencing: Reference
list
The reference list at the end of the assignment gives 
more detail about all of the sources used in the 
assignment. The author's name and the year of 
publication always come first. See APA reference list.
Comment [de18]: Referencing: Reference
list
After the author's name and the year, each entry 
shows the publication details - for books, this 
includes the title and publisher name. The title of the 
book is always in italics for APA Style. See APA 
reference list.
Comment [de19]: Format: Hanging indent
Each entry in the reference list has a hanging indent. 
This means that every line after the first is indented 
(moved a few spaces to the right).